[Music] Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger, and
in this part of our series on mathematical
foundations, we're going to look at how to
visualize the rational numbers and introduce
one of the 20th century's most remarkable
discoveries: something called Ford circles.
Okay, so we've introduced the rational numbers
as pairs of integers, but we haven't explained
how to visualize these things. So here's a very
nice way of thinking about them. First of all,
we start in the plane where we have
an x-axis with integer values and a
y-axis with integer values. That allows us
to identify a pair of integers with a point,
one of these integer lattice points in the plane.
There are an infinite number of them, and here
is the origin. We imagine ourselves at the origin
looking out at this integer lattice, like stars in
the night sky. If we look in this direction here,
say towards (3,2), then behind this one is (6,4),
and behind that would be (9,6). If we look
in the corresponding opposite direction,
we would have (-3,-2) and so on. Since we're
equating 3/2 with 6/4, these are the same rational
numbers. It follows that this line represents that
rational number, and so a rational number, in this
point of view, is nothing but a line through the
origin through some integer point in this lattice,
with a slight exception. The exception is that
this line here is not included because that would
correspond to a fraction or a rational number
of the form k/0, and that's not allowed. So
all lines except for the horizontal one that go
through the origin constitute rational numbers.
Now let's connect that with a more standard
way of thinking about it. We're looking here
at the line where y is equal to 1, okay?
That's above the x-axis, a unit one above,
and our line through (3,2), which represents the
rational number 3/2, intersects this red line at
that point right there. That's the point
whose x-coordinate is 3/2. In other words,
where this line intersects the red line
is where we usually think of the rational
number as sitting on a number line. So in
this formulation of things, we do not want
this to be the rational number line; we rather
want this line here, which is one unit up,
to be the rational number line. So we think
of this as being the integer number line,
and we think of this as being the rational number
line. Any rational number corresponds to a line,
and that line intersects the red line somewhere,
and that's the actual rational number in the usual
sense represented by that line. So a rational
number is a line through the origin and an integer
point (m,n) which is not horizontal. This gives
us a very physical, visualizable understanding
of what rational numbers are. Moreover, it
connects with these remarkable Ford circles.
I'm now going to tell you about Ford circles,
which were introduced or discovered by Lester
Ford in an article in 1938, just before World War
II, in the American Mathematical Monthly. It was
a remarkable discovery that connects with so many
things and gives us a lovely further insight into
the nature and complexity of the rational number
system. Here's what we do: I'm going to look at
that rational number strip that we had in the
previous slide but in a blown-up way. So here is
our ordinary integer number line, the x-axis: 0,
1, 2, -1, and so on. And here is the line y=1. So
this is level y=1, that's the line that we had
in red in the previous picture. What I do is,
for every integer point or for every integer
rational number, I draw a circle of diameter one.
So it fits exactly in here, and these circles,
each one for every integer rational number,
they all fit together nicely, touching
each other and touching the line y=1.
Now what we're going to do is we're going
to set other circles on top of the circles
that we already have. So between these circles
here, we're going to position another circle,
which is tangent to the two circles we already
have and just touches our line y=1. Then it's
obviously by symmetry going to meet this line
at the place where the x-coordinate is 1/2,
and it turns out (by a nice computation) that
the diameter of this circle is exactly 1/4. We
can visualize that by imagining a small
bubble. We drop a little bubble in here,
and we allow that bubble to grow, always
touching the two circles we already have,
until it finally touches the top of the
surface of the water. At that point, it stops.
For example, after we've gotten that one there,
we can repeat this procedure. We could drop a
bubble in on this side; then it would be tangent
to the circle 1/2 and the circle 1, and it would
grow until it reached up there, and then it
would be that green circle there. Similarly,
if we drop the bubble in here and allowed it
to grow, we would get that one there. And so
we can do that anywhere along, and in this
way, we get a successive sequence of circles,
each one tangent to two previous ones and to the
top line. These circles are called Ford circles.
Actually, the usual formulation has them down
here, so it's symmetrically opposite, but it's
convenient for some purposes, for many purposes,
to think of them the way I've drawn them here.
There are a few remarkable facts that happen.
The first remarkable fact is that every rational
number appears as the top of one of these
Ford circles. So if we keep doing this,
eventually every rational number,
even very obscure ones with huge
denominators and numerators, will appear
as the top of one Ford circle exactly.
Another interesting fact is that we can
say exactly what the rational number that
corresponds to a Ford circle is if we know the
two Ford circles that it touches. Here's the rule:
Between m/n and p/q, the Ford circle
is (m+p)/(n+q). This is not the sum of
these two rational numbers; it's a new kind of
operation. You just add the numerators, and you
add the denominators. That's called the mediant
of these two rational numbers. For example,
this one here is touching 1/2 and touching 1,
so it's obtained by adding 1+1 over adding 2+1,
which is 2/3. This one here would be 2+1
over 3+1, which is 3/4. It's remarkable.
Finally, two touching Ford circles, for example,
the ones at 2/3 and the one at 3/4, have the
property that when you look at these numbers, they
have a special relation: 24 - 33 is either plus
or minus one. So these two rational numbers are
as close as they can be without being equal. If
they were equal, then this would be zero, so they
are as close as they can be without being equal.
Ford circles have interesting connections with
hyperbolic geometry, as we'll eventually see,
but it's a lovely geometrical visualization.
It shows us that we can think about rational
numbers as a sort of sequence of increasing
complexity. As the denominators become bigger,
the corresponding Ford circles become smaller,
and there's this froth of ever-increasing and more
complicated and smaller rational numbers
between the ones that we already have.
Next time, I want to talk about a
summary of what we've done so far
and how it affects mathematics education. I
hope you're going to join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for [Music] listening.